---
title: "Knowledge Asymmetries and Climate Finance: An Inquiry into Environmental Market Failures and Political Legitimacy"
collection: publications
layout: single
author: "James Rice"
category: manuscripts
excerpt: "In archetypal credit and capital markets, informational gaps can lead to the withdrawal of high-impact participants and incentivise excessive risk-taking by parties unaware of the risks they face. Within climate-related markets there is a similar trend: investors systematically underestimate tail risks associated with carbon-intensive assets—including risks from climate-caused natural events, which threaten those assets—while firms strategically under-disclose their exposure to these physical and transition risks."
date: 2025-12-31
volume: 2
issue: 2
pages: "117-135"
venue: "Cambridge Journal of Climate Research"
paperurl: "https://diamond-oa.lib.cam.ac.uk/entities/publication/01f6e952-af8f-4eda-bbf6-cd1b2d2cfbf8"
citation: 'Rice, James. (2025). "Knowledge Asymmetries and Climate Finance: An Inquiry into Environmental Market Failures and Political Legitimacy." <i>Cambridge Journal of Climate Research</i>, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 117-135.'
---

The international system, as it presently exists, has proven woefully inadequate in its efforts to prevent the global injustices of massive ecosystem loss and environmental degradation. These issues have disproportionally affected individuals living in impoverished countries and in zones characterized by precarious living standards and negligible welfare status both well below the per capita income enjoyed by the Global North since the onset of the industrial revolution. The brunt of the harms to result from climate change will inevitably affect the Global South to a higher degree, because of underdeveloped infrastructure and weaker ability to adapt ex ante and respond ex post. International agencies, such as UNEP, the UNFCCC, and the IPCC, that are dedicated to instituting international agreements to combat rising surface temperatures, are struggling to create international momentum for realizing the growing necessity for radical action. This essay takes a critical perspective on theories of international culture, society, governance, competition, and great-power rivalry that call for remediations (on the part of industrialized nations) for climate-related loss and damage required by theories of environmental and economic justice. I argue that these theories must consider both the differential capacity for country-specific economic growth potential and the inequality of wealth that exists between developed nations and developing ones when measuring responsibility for climate damages and allocating environmental legal regulations such as financing and cost burdens. Governance and management of the biosphere is desperately needed to ensure equitable transnational standards of environmental justice which, through multilateral adherence to a regime of ecological justice, will create an international coalition of sustainable societies. International justice for the developing world is not only about development. The Global South requires allowances for subsistence emissions, necessary for the purpose of growth—allowances that are due to them through norms of fairness and distributional justice. In addition, it is possible that any level of emissions above zero after the revelations of climate science are unjust, ethically speaking. This claim draws on the idea that justice extends to non-human life, and requires action too. I address this in the latter sections of this essay. If we return to current social conditions, so-called “luxury emissions” of Global North countries need to be curtailed in line with, and also more rapidly than, the increase in emissions from Global South nations. In the conclusion I argue there is a growing need for radical social austerity and climate conservatism on the part of large emitters. 
